RFC Move histogram CPU backend implementation to Supported (#2015)
uxlfoundation/oneDPL: rfcs/supported/algorithms_histogram_cpu_backends/README.md

Reviewer: The introduction can perhaps be updated as well.

Author: updated

implementation. It makes sense to include this as part of a future improvement of `parallel_for`, where a user could
provide extra information in the call to influence details of the backend implementation from the non-background
specific implementation code.  Details which may be included could include grain size or a functor to determine fallback
to serial implementation.

### Temporary Memory Requirements
Both algorithms should have temporary memory complexity of `O(num_bins)`, and specifically will allocate `num_bins`
output histogram typed elements for each thread used. Depending on the number of input elements, all available threads
may not be used.

### Computational Complexity
#### Even Bin API
The proposed algorithm should have `O(N) + O(num_bins)` operations where `N` is the number of input elements, and
`num_bins` is the number of histogram bins.

#### Custom Range Bin API
The proposed algorithm should have `O(N * log(num_bins)) + O(num_bins)` operations where `N` is the number of input
elements, and `num_bins` is the number of histogram bins.

## Future work

> * Improve parallel_for pattern to allow generic implementation level to specify chunksize and serial cutoff thresholds.

Reviewer 2: `parallel_for`

Author: fixed

# Host Backends Support for the Histogram APIs

## Introduction
The oneDPL library added histogram APIs in the oneAPI Specification 1.4. Please see the
[oneAPI Specification](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneAPI-spec/blob/main/source/elements/oneDPL/source/parallel_api/algorithms.rst#parallel-algorithms)
for details. This RFC outlines the now supported host-side backends (serial, TBB, OpenMP).

The commit containing the implementation proposed here can be found
[here](https://github.com/uxlfoundation/oneDPL/commit/780705c3bf3eee50b72a37cbc730de28d524efe9).

### Version Information
Histogram APIs are supported for host execution policies as of version 2022.8.0 of oneDPL, specification version 1.4.
```
ONEDPL_VERSION_MAJOR=2022
ONEDPL_VERSION_MINOR=8
ONEDPL_VERSION_PATCH=0

ONEDPL_SPEC_VERSION=104
```

> Histogram APIs are supported for device execution policies as of version 2022.5.0.  It was first specified in oneDPL
> specification version 1.4. However, this was released before `ONEDPL_SPEC_VERSION` was defined within our implementation
> of oneDPL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Histogram APIs are supported for device execution policies as of version 2022.5.0. It was released before
`ONEDPL_SPEC_VERSION` was defined by the implementation.
```

Author: taken, thanks.

```
ONEDPL_VERSION_MAJOR=2022
ONEDPL_VERSION_MINOR=5
ONEDPL_VERSION_PATCH=0
```

## Motivations
There are many cases to use a host-side serial or a host-side implementation of histogram. Another motivation for adding

> the support is simply to be spec compliant with the oneAPI specification.

Reviewer: This does not seem really informative, I think it can be deleted.

Author: removed

## Supported Implementation

> After exploring the above implementation for `histogram`, the following implementation better represents the use cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After exploring several alternatives, we think the following implementation better represents the use cases
```

Author: taken, thanks.

which are important, and provides reasonable performance for most cases.

### Embarrassingly Parallel Via Temporary Histograms
This method uses temporary storage and a pair of calls to backend specific `parallel_for` functions to accomplish the
`histogram`. These calls will use the existing infrastructure to provide properly composable parallelism, without extra
histogram-specific patterns in the implementation of a backend.

#### Enumerable Thread Local Storage feature
This algorithm requires that each parallel backend add a "make" function with the following signature:
```

> template <typename _ValueType, typename... _Args>
> auto /* or unspecified enumerable thread local storage type */
> oneapi::dpl::__par_backend::__make_enumerable_tls(_Args&&)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
template <typename _ValueType, typename... _Args>
auto /* or unspecified enumerable thread local storage type */
oneapi::dpl::__par_backend::__make_enumerable_tls(_Args&&...);
```

Author: Good catch.  Fixed.

With the overhead associated with this algorithm, the implementation of each `parallel_for` may fallback to a serial
implementation. It makes sense to include this as part of a future improvement of `parallel_for`, where a user could
provide extra information in the call to influence details of the backend implementation from the non-background
specific implementation code.  Details which may be included could include grain size or a functor to determine fallback
to serial implementation.

### Temporary Memory Requirements
Both algorithms should have temporary memory complexity of `O(num_bins)`, and specifically will allocate `num_bins`
output histogram typed elements for each thread used. Depending on the number of input elements, all available threads
may not be used.

### Computational Complexity
#### Even Bin API
The proposed algorithm should have `O(N) + O(num_bins)` operations where `N` is the number of input elements, and
`num_bins` is the number of histogram bins.

#### Custom Range Bin API
The proposed algorithm should have `O(N * log(num_bins)) + O(num_bins)` operations where `N` is the number of input
elements, and `num_bins` is the number of histogram bins.

> ### Future work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Future work
```

Author: Fixed.

This could be explored if we find temporary storage is too large for some cases and the atomic approach does not
provide a good fallback.

## Supported Implementation
After exploring the above implementation for `histogram`, the following implementation better represents the use cases
which are important, and provides reasonable performance for most cases.

### Version Information

> Histogram APIs are supported for host execution policies as of version 2022.8.0 of oneDPL, specification version 1.4.

Reviewer: It would be great to found the version information easily at the beginning of the document.
Also I would move up the chapter describing the implementation above the thoughts on alternatives, which are now mostly of historical interest.

Author: moved the sections around toward this end.

```
ONEDPL_VERSION_MAJOR=2022
ONEDPL_VERSION_MINOR=8
ONEDPL_VERSION_PATCH=0

ONEDPL_SPEC_VERSION=104
```

Histogram APIs are supported for device execution policies as of version 2022.5.0.  It was first specified in oneDPL
specification version 1.4. However, this was released before `ONEDPL_SPEC_VERSION` was defined within our implementation
of oneDPL.
```
ONEDPL_VERSION_MAJOR=2022
ONEDPL_VERSION_MINOR=5
ONEDPL_VERSION_PATCH=0
```

### Embarrassingly Parallel Via Temporary Histograms
This method uses temporary storage and a pair of calls to backend specific `parallel_for` functions to accomplish the
`histogram`. These calls will use the existing infrastructure to provide properly composable parallelism, without extra
histogram-specific patterns in the implementation of a backend.

#### Enumerable Thread Local Storage feature
This algorithm requires that each parallel backend add a "make" function with the following signature:
```
template <typename _ValueType, typename... _Args>
/* unspecified enumerable thread local storage type */
oneapi::dpl::__par_backend::__make_enumerable_tls(_Args&&)
```

> returning an object which represents an enumerable thread local storage. The enumerable thread local storage object

Reviewer: Add that `_ValueType` represents the type of stored per-thread objects, it is not deduced and must be specified explicitly.

Author: done, along with a note about _Args as well.

> must provide the following interfaces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
must provide the following member functions:
```

* `__ValueType& get_for_current_thread()`

>  Returns reference to the current thread's stored object. This function is
>  meant to be used within a parallel context, where each thread can access storage exclusive to its thread index. The
>  thread local storage should be created on first call of this function per thread. This avoids unnecessary overhead
>  for loops with fewer threads used than maximum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Returns reference to the current thread's stored object. This function is meant to be used within a parallel context,
 with each thread exclusively accessing its part of the storage.
```
I dropped the implementation-specific part of the wording, as I believe it should better be separate from API description. It also applies to other suggestions below.

* `__ValueType& get_with_id(std::size_t __i)` 

>  Returns reference to the stored object for an index of the list of
>  already created elements, skipping any empty elements. This function must not be called within concurrently with
>  `get_for_current_thread()`, which may create new thread local storage elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Returns reference to the stored object at a given index to the list of already created elements, up to `size()`.
 This function must not be called concurrently with `get_for_current_thread()`, as that may create new
 elements in the storage.
```

* `std::size_t size() const`

>  Returns number of already created elements. Similar to `get_with_id()`, this must not be 
>  called concurrently with `get_for_current_thread()`, which may change the number of created elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Returns the number of already created elements. Similar to `get_with_id()`, this must not be 
 called concurrently with `get_for_current_thread()`.
```

> A unified implementation of `__enumerable_thread_local_storage` is provided with these features in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A unified implementation of `__enumerable_thread_local_storage_base` is provided with these features in
```

`include/oneapi/dpl/pstl/parallel_backend_utils.h` for use as a base implementation in a Curiously Recurring Template

> Pattern (CRTP) for individual parallel backends to derive from. When using this base struct, individual parallel
> backends must provide the following methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pattern (CRTP) for individual parallel backends to derive from. When using this base struct, derived classes
in specific parallel backends must provide the following methods.
```

* `static std::size_t get_num_threads()`

>  Returns the number of threads available in the current parallel backend and
>  context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Returns the maximal number of threads possible in the current parallel execution context.
```

* `static std::size_t get_thread_num()`

>  Returns the index of the current thread from within a parallel section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Returns the index of the calling thread in the current parallel execution context.
```

When these two functions are provided by the derived structure, the base implementation provides the functionality
specified above. An example of this is found in both `include/oneapi/dpl/pstl/omp/util.h` and
`include/oneapi/dpl/pstl/parallel_backend_tbb.h`. The serial backend instead defines its own specific
`__enumerable_thread_local_storage` type in `include/oneapi/dpl/pstl/parallel_backend_serial.h`.

> We decided to avoid using the class provided by TBB, `enumerable_thread_specific`, because on windows it indirectly
> includes "windows.h".  The baggage associated with "windows.h" is not worth the benefit of using the existing type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We decided to avoid using the `enumerable_thread_specific` class provided by TBB, because on Windows it includes
"windows.h".  The baggage associated with "windows.h" is not worth the benefit of using the existing type.
```
